A poison is any substance that is harmful to your body.
You might swallow, inhale, inject, or absorb a poison through your skin.
Any substance can be poisonous if too much is taken.
Poisoning is a condition or a process in which an organism becomes poisoned by a toxic substance or venom of an animal.
Acute poisoning is exposure to a poison on one occasion or during a short period of time.
Symptoms develop in close relation to the exposure.
Absorption of a poison is necessary for systemic poisoning.
In contrast, substances that destroy tissue but do not absorb, such as lye, are classified as corrosives rather than poisons.
Furthermore, many common household medications are not labeled with skull and crossbones, although they can cause severe illness or even death.
In the medical sense, poisoning can be caused by less dangerous substances than those legally classified as a poison.
Chronic poisoning is long-term repeated or continuous exposure to a poison where symptoms do not occur immediately or after each exposure.
The patient gradually becomes ill, or becomes ill after a long latent period.
Chronic poisoning most commonly occurs following exposure to poisons that bioaccumulate, or are biomagnified, such as mercury, gadolinium, and lead.
Contact or absorption of poisons can cause rapid death or impairment.
Agents that act on the nervous system can paralyze in seconds or less, and include both biologically derived neurotoxins and so-called nerve gases, which may be synthesized for warfare or industry.
Inhaled or ingested cyanide, used as a method of execution in gas chambers, almost instantly starves the body of energy by inhibiting the enzymes in mitochondria that make ATP.
Intravenous injection of an unnaturally high concentration of potassium chloride, such as in the execution of prisoners in parts of the United States, quickly stops the heart by eliminating the cell potential necessary for muscle contraction.
Most biocides, including pesticides, are created to act as poisons to target organisms, although acute or less observable chronic poisoning can also occur in non-target organisms (secondary poisoning), including the humans who apply the biocides and other beneficial organisms.
For example, the herbicide 2,4-D imitates the action of a plant hormone, which makes its lethal toxicity specific to plants.
Indeed, 2,4-D is not a poison, but classified as harmful.
Many substances regarded as poisons are toxic only indirectly, by toxication.
An example is wood alcohol or methanol, which is not poisonous itself, but is chemically converted to toxic formaldehyde and formic acid in the liver.
Many drug molecules are made toxic in the liver, and the genetic variability of certain liver enzymes makes the toxicity of many compounds differ between individuals.
Toxicology is the study of the symptoms, mechanisms, treatment and diagnosis of biological poisoning.
Exposure to radioactive substances can produce radiation poisoning, an unrelated phenomenon.
Poisoning is the harmful effect that occurs when a toxic substance is swallowed, is inhaled, or comes in contact with the skin, eyes, or mucous membranes, such as those of the mouth or nose.
Possible poisonous substances include prescription and over-the-counter drugs, illicit drugs, gases, chemicals, vitamins, food, mushrooms, plants, and animal venom.
Some poisons cause no damage, whereas others can cause severe damage or death.
The diagnosis is based on symptoms, on information gleaned from the poisoned person and bystanders, and sometimes on blood and urine tests.
Drugs should always be kept in original child-proof containers and kept out of the reach of children.
Treatment consists of supporting the person, preventing additional absorption of the poison, and sometimes increasing elimination of the poison.
More than 2 million people suffer some type of poisoning each year in the United States.
Drugs—prescription, over-the-counter, and illicit—are a common source of serious poisonings and poisoning-related deaths (see Acetaminophen Poisoning; see also Aspirin Poisoning).
Other common poisons include gases (for example, carbon monoxide), household products (see Caustic Substances Poisoning), agricultural products, plants, heavy metals (for example, iron and lead), vitamins, animal venom, and foods (particularly certain species of mushroom and fish).
However, almost any substance ingested in sufficiently large quantities can be toxic.
Poisoning is the most common cause of nonfatal accidents in the home.
Young children, because of curiosity and a tendency to explore, are particularly vulnerable to accidental poisoning in the home, as are older people, often due to confusion about their drugs.
Also vulnerable to accidental poisoning are hospitalized people (by drug errors) and industrial workers (by exposure to toxic chemicals).
Poisoning may also be a deliberate attempt to commit murder or suicide.
Most adults who attempt suicide by poisoning take more than one drug and also consume alcohol.
Poisoning may be used to disable a person (for example, to rape or rob them).
Rarely, parents with a psychiatric disorder poison their children to cause illness and thus gain medical attention (a disorder called factitious disorder imposed on another).
The symptoms caused by poisoning depend on the poison, the amount taken, and the age and underlying health of the person who takes it.
Some poisons are not very potent and cause problems only with prolonged exposure or repeated ingestion of large amounts.
Other poisons are so potent that just a drop on the skin can cause severe symptoms.
Some poisons cause symptoms within seconds, whereas others cause symptoms only after hours, days, or even years.
Some poisons cause few obvious symptoms until they have damaged vital organs—such as the kidneys or liver—sometimes permanently.
Ingested and absorbed toxins generally cause bodywide symptoms, often because they deprive the body's cells of oxygen or activate or block enzymes and receptors.
Symptoms may include changes in consciousness, body temperature, heart rate, and breathing and many others, depending on the organs affected.
Caustic or irritating substances injure the mucous membranes of the mouth, throat, gastrointestinal tract, and lungs, causing pain, coughing, vomiting, and shortness of breath.
Skin contact with toxins can cause various symptoms, for example, rashes, pain, and blistering.
Prolonged exposures may cause dermatitis.
Eye contact with toxins may injure the eye, causing eye pain, redness, and loss of vision.
Some of the most common ingredients in pesticides are organic phosphorus compounds, also called organophosphates.
Organophosphate pesticides are commonly used in and around homes, but related chemicals have been used as chemical warfare agents, specifically nerve agents.
A few of the chemical names of ingredients used in and around the home are malathion, diazinon, dichlorvos, fenthion, and chlorpyrifos.
These are lower-toxicity pesticides used variously for home and garden pest control, veterinary treatments, agricultural pest control, and even treatment of head lice.
If organophosphate insecticides are misused, they can be absorbed into the body in a number of ways: by drinking, inhaling, or by skin absorption.
The most dangerous effects are on the nervous system.
Treatment should start with moving the person from the area, removing any contaminated clothing, showering for 15-20 minutes if pesticide is on the skin, and calling Poison Control at 1-800-222-1222.
Patients with symptoms can be treated with drugs called atropine and pralidoxime.
Severe poisonings can be difficult to treat and recovery can be prolonged, making prevention of poisoning very important.
Organophosphorus nerve agents were discovered in Germany in the 1930s; tabun, sarin, and soman were produced during and after World War II.
Great Britain developed a potent nerve agent called VX in the early 1950s.
The most famous use of a nerve agent was by the Japanese cult Aum Shinrikyo.
A 1994 release of sarin in Motsumoto resulted in seven deaths.
A 1995 release of sarin in the Tokyo subway system resulted in twelve deaths and more than five thousand victims seeking medical attention.
Poison Control is on the front line of monitoring and assessing for any evidence that a chemical weapon release has occurred.
While all medical records at Poison Control are confidential, symptoms that occur as a result of poisoning are assessed to determine if there is any indication of chemical weapons exposure.
This assessment occurs in real time.
Should a chemical weapons attack be suspected or confirmed, poison specialists are familiar with the symptoms and treatment.
They would advise individuals and health providers about treatment and work with health department officials to ensure the best possible outcome for victims.
It is the most poisonous substance known to man.
A couple of teaspoons would be enough to kill everyone in the UK.
A couple of kilos would kill every human on earth.
It is so dangerous that it is manufactured in military installations and at around £100 trillion per kilo it is also the most expensive substance ever made.
Yet despite being so toxic and so costly it is in huge demand.
Many people pay large amounts of money to have it injected into their foreheads.
It is botulinum toxin - better known as Botox - a toxin produced by bacteria first discovered in poorly prepared sausages during the 18th Century.
It was named after the Latin for sausage - botulus.
On the LD50 toxicity scale, which measures how much of a substance you would need to kill half the people it is given to, Botox measures just 0.
000001 mg/kg.
In other words you need would need around 0.
00007mg to kill a 70kg man like me.
Or to put it another way, a lethal dose for me would weigh less than one cubic millimetre of air.
Botulinum toxin kills its victims by causing respiratory failure.
It is a neurotoxin - it enters nerves and destroys vital proteins.
This stops communication between nerves and muscles.
Only the growth of new nerve endings can restore muscle function, and that can take months.
Its main claim to fame is that it will iron out wrinkles in ageing faces and does so by destroying the nerves that cause frowning.
The quantities used are tiny - a few billionths of a gram, dissolved in saline.
In the name of science I tried Botox a few years ago.
It certainly smoothed away the wrinkles but it also gave me a weird expression, until the new nerve endings grew.
But botulinum toxin is far more than simply a vanity product.
It is extremely useful for treating a number of medical conditions, ranging from eye squints to migraines, excess sweating to leaky bladders.
In fact there are currently more than 20 different medical conditions that botulinum toxin is being used to treat.
More are being discovered all the time.
